um anyway we're here now
for our next session with phase zero
um and phase zero is located here in
la and i came across their practice um
via the ucla program um
here which they were doing open studios
and i stopped and got sucked in to this
simulation
that faze was presenting in the studio
and kind of walking people through
um so we're going to bring faison but
first i want to just read the
introduction feizero is a
multi-disciplinary game designer and
researcher
specialized in player experience and
narrative design
their personal work explores emotional
experiences
marginalized identities digital
consciousness
and video games as art practice their
featured project
game design the game question mark is a
game about making games by
making a game within the game faze is
driven by
games in their personal and professional
life and has been a sole developer on a
number of award-winning projects
and is currently a game designer at a
popular aaa game studio
they are also an active member of the
game dev community and have been awarded
multiple honors and scholarships
for excellence in design faze is a proud
igda scholar
and woman in games ambassador glitch
city la member
and has been featured presenter most
recently at i o technology festival
indicate fembet and here at transfer
gallery
in 2019 faze completed their masters in
game design as art practice and wrote a
short
book and thesis on meaningful level
design
bringing together psychology with
interactive spaces
so here we have face
welcome hey welcome
[Music]
joining us today really excited to have
you here and i know it's the middle of
your work week so we appreciate you
taking time for
the art side we were just talking before
you joined uh
live about um practice and you know
adjacent practices and splitting our
attentions
right between work and
so um thanks so much for coming you
wanna give us a little bit of a preview
of what you're gonna take us through in
your simulation walkthrough today
yeah i am so in
uh in making the talk
i've given quite a few talks and
lectures and
and all of that and i wanted to see what
would be something that i could only do
at home
and um that was getting that was showing
people kind of the behind the scenes
and more of the uh the making
of the game and so
yeah that's what most of the talks going
to or or half of the talks going to be
about and then i'm going to
walk through game design the game and
talk about some of the
decisions or the whys of the decisions
and the kind of what was going on in my
head
well while working on that
cool and um we're really excited to have
you also as a cute puppy so we're going
to ask
the live stream
hit it chicone let's check it out
um today i i'd like to give a
presentation that's
only possible at home really when i was
thinking about putting this together
i was going to do something more
traditional you know with the slides and
stuff but then i thought
it's one of the only chances i actually
will get to show
my work and it's kind of the behind the
scenes form
usually i'm shoving together everything
on a laptop and and running across
maybe even the country and just pray
that to microscope that everything goes
well without a hitch
so i like to use this unique opportunity
to
kind of show the behind-the-scenes
footage of my work and how it all comes
together
um first i like to talk a little bit
about
what it means to be a game
and level designer there's a lot of
um definitions and kind of
shadowy uh-ness around what what exactly
is a game designer
i also like to talk about how i broke
into the industry because it's something
that
that comes up a lot and i i think i
think people you know find it
interesting
and a little bit of what my day-to-day
uh
day-to-day in the industry is like after
that i like to jump into game design the
game
which is one of my
my it's my thesis project from from
grad school it's a game about making
games
from a game designer or from a game
designer's point of view
so we'll go into that and do a bit of a
director's cut on it if you will and
you'll have to forgive me if i'm
stumbling a little bit i've been in a
pandemic
and right outside everything's on fire
and this is by far the scariest thing
i've done all year
it's a very weird talking to yourself
to a uh imaginary crowd so yeah
well just get that out there
okay so
so some of my personal games are very
traditional or kind of gamey as you
would say
it involves puzzles collecting you know
action
and even blasting through like parasitic
invaders
to reclaim agency in a chaotic mental
world
others are a little more esoteric and
conceptual
they can involve concepts such as
similacra
existentialism as a favorite or
exploring
the early 2000s internet as a
as an actual like space
what unites them all i think is a sense
of play and imagination and world
building
to explore complexity and
through this design standpoint a
curiosity to know
what is possible for me to communicate
in the medium and
how can i how can i push what the medium
means
and what it does best
so in an area of games that i um
that i particularly uh specialize in or
and take a great interest in is level
design
and i want to show and talk about a
little bit of what is
level design and and what's a level
designer
i i think to anyone not in games it it
may actually be
like i don't know i just i have to
assume that it's not really known
i know when i when i was exploring a
space i didn't know what a level
designer was
so yeah let me talk about that a little
see what would be it good
just pulled this up so a level designer
is someone who
connects the gameplay and story to the
environment of a space
it's not only environmental storytelling
but also what does the environment
itself
say um since everything is built from
the ground up kind of like a
an architect you can choose
like what do mountains mean what does a
house mean
what does it mean to be underground what
does it mean to be on a plateau
um and also communicate
through these decisions
uh different beats of the story
in different different
different actions that you want the
player to be
doing and feeling at the moment
and what i'm showing here are examples
of
of the the level design stage these are
called gray boxes
or pink box boxes or or block outs
and
at this stage so the reason
i'm using simple simple shapes is
because it's about the
movement time the um
[Music]
about how one goes through the space
and that and built into that is the
story
built into the the
shape language built into how long a
space
takes to how chaotic it
is every everything about its shape
even before any art goes into it is um
is what level design is and there's an
incredible amount of information that
can be
given just through the just through the
shape language
and and just through through really
blocks and simple shapes
what i'm a building here
is one of my um my game's effigy
it's uh it's based off of a house i
i lived in as a kid and um
some of the things i'm i'm thinking
about while
while putting this together is getting
kind of the essence of the house
um and
using skill to to communicate
how it felt as it as a child and there
it was like a house that was kind of
step it was
scary to me um that i was not
comfortable in
so when moving through the space and how
i build the space i'll make it
a bit larger a bit more chaotic but
still keep the
the essence of the house in it so that i
could communicate that
to the to the player
without saying it without dialogue
here's one of the finished images from
the uh
the game itself
so i have game design the game opened up
here
the uh well the project file
of where i would be working on it i
wanted to show
both the behind the scenes and also
some of the the districts in it because
i probably won't have time to go through
the
the whole game and also uh just explain
a little bit of what is a
a game designer um
it's what uh
what i do daily uh professionally and as
an artist and it's it's a little bit of
a
um an anomaly
uh something hard to a bit a bit
difficult to explain but i'll try my
best
so a game designer as
usually thought of as the ideal person
um but in practice they're a bit more to
that
professionally a game designer is kind
of the
it's kind of whatever anyone else isn't
if there's an artist and there's a
programmer
the game designer is going to do pretty
much
all of the little odd jobs and also have
the high level overview
of what's going on in the game as well
as the low level
actually too it's uh they're the ones
that are
that are going to be looking at the
maybe not writing
the story you may have a writer for them
for that
but um saying how the story is going to
be
told they think about the player
experience from moment to moment
um they do a ton of documentation
uh that would be everything from
creating level diagrams like
uh let me zoom out here
like this may be a paper map
uh just something drawn on paper or with
the on
grid before you go in and work in a 3d
space or sometimes you start
straight in the 3d space the the game
designer
does overlap with the level designer
usually level design is a
a subset of game design so
another another
um component of game design like i said
it's kind of the uh
kind of the everything in between and
the ring leader
um game designers communicate
with the team and make sure that
everyone kind of knows what they're
doing
knows what each other is doing
they're the the
sort of the managers but
it's usually best when you lead from
behind and let people do
what they're really good at like you
don't want to tell an artist
how to do art if that's not your you're
not a subject matter
expert you can
you try to
you try to deliver what the the intent
of a space is
and what the
[Music]
what the like high level vision is for
it and then you leave plenty of space
for
subject matter experts to to fill in
so it's a lot of push and pull it's a
lot of communication it's a lot of
meetings um and
so it's not one thing it's not is
someone sitting around telling everyone
what to do designers
are super busy you have to have
about a thousand different skill sets
because you can
be doing everything from scripting which
is
kind of like a programming light to
building assets
um like temporary assets in the gray box
stage
you could be writing
writing story you have to be ready
to be a bit scrappy and um
fill in wherever the need wherever there
there is a need as well as making sure
that the high level goals
of a game or level are being taken care
of and that everybody
understands everybody else so
well um game designers are really
critical
they also tend to be the most hated
person on the team uh
just kind of like you know like the the
tough moms of the operation
like the the the people that have to
keep everybody
like have to deliver the good and bad
news
and have to um make sure everyone's due
on on track uh
for four of the goals and also the ones
that have to say
kind of like oh like you know this isn't
working or this
it's not really what i intend what was
intended
um you know even if the work is really
great
the the game designer is the one that
always uh
um it's the
advocate for the player whatever it's
we have to be we have to be the advocate
for the of the player and the player
experience
in the in the team and that can be
that can be kind of tough sometimes
so
yeah i just want to show some parts of
game design the game before we
walk through it this game as you can see
it looks kind of like those level design
the level design videos and pictures i
was telling you before
showing you before that's purposeful
the the um
sort of gist behind this game is that
you are
a game designer who
has um
who is building this game
and you're playing the game
as you're building it so each of these
portions represent a different stage of
the game design process
it's um it's something i
i did it's actually my thesis project
i uh i wanted to talk about game design
and i just felt the most appropriate way
to do that was through
making a game about it
so let's walk through a couple of areas
here and then
um then we'll actually get into
it
see
so this first spot is my
my in-game room
i just kind of want you guys to see all
the the trickery and smoke and mirrors
that go into
into uh games into making games i just
think it's really interesting
naturally
this is my actual pc setup
sometimes with a third screen in my
computer salvador
that's a ball i forgot outside
okay let me flip that section off
this is the area you'll see later that
we drop into
and then you can see um
this sort of maze-like space from a
a level design perspective the reason
that this
became like tight and maze-like
in a clue has lots of a clue
occlusion is to say that there's a
question
there's a mystery to be solved um that
um i'm like literally hiding the space
from you um it
emotionally it's it's kind of the um
the what is this the thinking period
with little hints of what's to come
if you see this in games like these
little windows or like peaks to the end
it's so that you know what your goal
is without like ui or objective
being flashed in your face um
we really want
even though everything's constructed we
want it to feel
like you thought of it and like it's
natural uh
like i said it's a lot of smoke and
mirrors it's a lot of psychology
um everything
we pretty much do as game designers and
level designers
is making the player think exactly what
we want them to think but making them
think that it was
them thinking it was their idea
this is the radian puzzle
i'll save that for the play through as
well as that secret
area back there
over there is the um
the end of the game it's behind the
waterfall because
every good game designer knows that
secrets are behind waterfalls
it's another maze like area it's the um
the idea stage the uh the part in
production
where you're wondering what a game's
going to be
[Music]
so naturally
it's going to be maze-like
okay i just wanted to show a little bit
of that uh
yeah let's jump into game design the
game
but let's see a little bit of game
design the game and
uh hopefully in the q a i'll i'll be
able to link you to
to this one so you can see the rest of
it
but i'll just take some a little bit of
a walk through here
and get you started
so first let's see secrets
oh my god clicking the mouse turns off
the music
i haven't played this in forever so i'm
just uh
remembering things as well
so this is unreal it's my engine of
choice
it's where i get it's actually where i
got started
um with programming i you see that
visual based scripting
that's how i learned how to how to
program
and this is dick physics this is a
amazing thing that unreal does
i i recommend it
okay let's check out this
guy he didn't get skinned because i
i ran out of time making the game i'm a
i was a busy grad student
so no what did i do now oh my god you're
just watching tutorials the whole time
weren't you
i cannot confirm nor deny
the deadline is coming look at this
place look at me i'm a freaking hyper
masculine cube
why is this a thing you've got to finish
and save us all
get your butt down to the inspiration
and find the plan so you can finish the
game or we're all fudged
fudged
those footsteps are my absolute favorite
it pointed them out to you so it could
drive you crazy
[Music]
so what this is is the
you're in front of your computer the
empty screen you know you need to build
a game
um it's kind of like the blank sheet
the uh the blank sheet of paper when you
need to write a
a 80 page essay so build the damn game
or we're doomed
[Music]
here's that sort of um
actually one moment let me turn that
down
that confusion space that occlusion the
what is this what's what's next
a little hint of what comes
there's a lot of like um gamer
inside jokes gamer tam
like that super pixelated water
and that's the deadline about to crash
into the
the planet here the game that i'm
building
looks like we have we open the final
gate
we cannot
we have to complete different parts of
the game again before we can open the
final gate
so
i'm gonna actually so i'm going up to
the radion
puzzle but
i don't know right uh and so i actually
forgot something on my desk
in my room so i'm going to go back to it
and then run over here
nobody memorizes this stuff so this is
my right eye chart
i'm gonna take that with me the reason i
made this uh
so horribly inaccessible is because i
um i hate puzzles and i hate puzzle
games
and so i challenge myself to make
an entire puzzle game and this is just
what i think of puzzle games
of where i had to pick up some obscure
note to even solve one of my own puzzles
that's uh that's that's kind of where
i'm at with them
so this is a
a love hate letter to to puzzle games
as well as game creation in general
oh i didn't fall they always fall over
there
okay prototyping discovered so this is
about the stage of
game creation where you're
you're having to um
whoops what's going on over there
you're having to to make um
to script out uh something to prove out
your mechanics it's
called the prototyping stage and so the
reason that this is a radei
puzzle is because often mechanics aren't
like you know press the fun button
it's it's it's um
[Music]
usually quite unfun to to think of
what's going to be oh
and by mechanics i mean the main actions
of your
your game uh it's a ton of
logic it's a ton of math to do even the
most basic of things
so yeah i thought it would be funny to
make a um
a radii a radii puzzle to represent that
portion of the
of the process
and
so right now my fraction is dividing by
zero this is a fraction up here
that's numerator and denominator um
it's okay if you didn't understand that
because once again this is a puzzle game
and uh puzzle games aren't made for
people to understand
very tongue-in-cheek by the way
it's also an art game and kind of
tongue-in-cheek about
if art's made to be understood
so let's see i put um i guess
in okay
i'm still dividing by zero
so
let's see here
i have to turn around and see okay it's
on the bottom
i want to flip that up to
[Music]
one of those balls so
i think i'm wanting to move it by
two pipe three
oops wrong button
okay so i just put in a guess
it was i believe that's two
o two two pi negative two pi
over two
and
let me see my paper here
okay
so
i'm trying to move it to the blue
so i want to go negative 3 pi
over 2.
that's three it's negative
this is two i think this is it
yeah that's it
so this is my favorite spot
it's a level design shrine
this is my luck my wacom tablet but i
don't have um
what i need to activate it yet
[Music]
on the walls engraved into the walls
here are
all of my drawings or like a sample of
like my drawings in making this game
it's like the diagrams and uh you can
see the
math down there when i was making the
radii puzzle
or testing testing it out
[Music]
here's an overview of the whole space
you need to find ideas in the world
before moving forward
i don't have enough ideas so
i can't get in there any more ideas
so let's go find some ideas
there's this a bird that's like out of
control
i really love stupid stuff like that
so here's another favorite spot um
people really like breaking games and so
i just made sure to have plenty of space
for
them to explore a game-breaking a-hole
discovered
and absolutely nothing discovered
so yeah that's for for my favorite
favorite folks game breakers
this is the idea hole this is the part
of production
where like or especially
when you're making your own games where
you're confused and you know you want to
do something but you don't know what you
want to do
and it keeps you up at night
um this is kind of what it feels like
so i'm gonna get on my standing desk
treadmill
and uh i'm gonna binge tutorials
so that i can start getting some ideas
together
now i need to find more standing desks
okay
nope find
more
i just passed an idea but i wasn't smart
enough to consume it
now with more tutorials i am so time to
find those ideas
this is a 3d pac-man
portion
the first game made specifically with
girls in mind
[Music]
not that that's a good thing
okay i'm consuming these ideas because
that's the currency of making games
in this world
anymore
okay i think i have enough ideas to move
on i'm gonna repair those broken
pcs
by clicking my paper clip
cool so if i want more ideas i'll come
back to that
uh i don't do i want to use my ideas no
i'll come back around
this is dead ideas this is where ideas
go to die
see what if i can talk to this guy yet
i don't have anything to bribe him with
to get to my dead ideas
[Applause]
so
okay i was able to open that up with um
some of my ideas i spent some i think
about
three or so there
and i made it to one of these gates
a little bit step closer to opening up
the
main one there
yeah so basically i'm going around
collecting ideas um and completing
the game little by little um
by building out the game while i'm
playing it
and each one kind of activates these
pillars in the center
and when you collect it all the game
will be formed like the
you'll see art instead of these blocks
and um
and then you'll get to see well the what
happens in the ending when you
successfully make a game so yeah i think
i'm gonna leave it
off there and um
yeah i hope you guys check this one out
oh man i completely forgot about that
that scared the hell out of me actually
that's one of my ideas running away um
wait i have to fight it that was
terrifying
it's my complicated idea so yeah um this
is game design the game
and uh and hopefully i can um
talk to you guys a little bit more about
it if you have any questions
uh in the q a so yeah that's my
my talk and um thanks for thanks for
listening
just my bisexual seating position
all right welcome everyone uh we're here
with faiz
and zaiba and we were all kind of just
like laughing about
that anxiety of feeling ideal grown away
from us
and like oh there it was and then like
chasing after it
come back
thanks so much for the tour of um
game design the game and it's so special
to like zoom out and get that
view where you're actually working on
the game in that role
um where should we begin there's so much
stuff that i want to
talk about here i guess
one of the things that i'm really
curious about chatting with you
is um this sense of play and
exploring complexity and this is a
carryover from yesterday
amelia winger bearskin was talking also
about play and how it's so accessible
to so many different types of people
because it's sort of this innate human
curiosity and playfulness
so i'm curious if you could talk a
little bit more about the sense of play
and how you use that to explore
complexity
yeah i think um
i think i'm kind of going back to
[Music]
almost like play from childhood like all
all childhood play
isn't exactly like fun and games
exactly it's um a way of acting out
safely things you'll encounter as an
adult
and i'm also acting out
acting out problems in a in a safe space
and that's kind of the basis of where
i'm coming from
in uh game design the game is a playful
kind of comedic game a lot of my games
are not
but they're still there's they still are
like playful at their core
they're a safe space um i don't have
jump scares
there's uh they're for an analytical
space
and um they
a part of play is being able to
once you enter the space the safe space
or uh
cross the magic circle able to say this
is where i am now and
i'm ready to learn and i'm ready to like
grow
and it's something that happens more
quickly than almost any other space
just like when you dress up or
or in a costume or whenever you do that
sort of role playing
you inhabit the character and are ready
to receive
information and learn through
through it so yeah i use play in that
way as a
as a a safe area to explore um
sometimes really complex uh topics
i i think it's interesting like a
contrasting artifacts too which is the
game that i've shown the most so far
we're hoping to do a show of game design
the game maybe in the future but hasn't
hasn't been shown
uh in in my context yet um but i i think
about a moment
we could consider playful in that piece
like um where you're sort of petting the
dog
to regain your health and like
this kind of like very calming human
moment
right um so yeah i see how play can
operate differently in different
contexts though
um and i think it was really interesting
for me because i
have not yet worked in a game design
environment i'm kind of thinking about
moving my professional career in that
direction but
understanding more about what a game
designer does and that idea of like
connecting the gameplay and the story to
the environment or the place
and so one of the ways that that comes
out so clearly in this talk
is when you're talking about um the
the maze right and how
it is a space about occlusion and you
just
know from the architecture that there's
like a question or a mystery there
what is this um so i'm hoping you can
talk a little bit more about
how you think about emotion in sort of
level design and game design
and how that comes into your work yeah
this is an area
where it was actually much more helpful
for me
like as a student when i was in grad
school when i was an undergrad
um to go full in
on game design practices like honda
industry level
this is something they've been thinking
about since
pretty much since 3d games were were
created and there's
there's a like a depth of information to
to use there so
with spaces spaces um aren't only like a
place to
to go in and do whatever the mechanics
are for
they're not just for like jumping and
running and
and uh and that sort of thing their
communication their part of the story
because the spaces are built from the
ground up where they happen
is usually done alongside the story
in a way that can't really happen
in any other medium kind of in
cinema but not really or at least i
haven't seen much of it
so what that means is if um
most spaces most gameplay spaces begin
with a a process
a prospect space prospect space is
uh open there's things to discover
there's also danger there's questions
you can see you can see
wide open and also get a feel for where
there is
complete safety but also less questions
and less
opportunity um these are like vistas
uh open forest plains
areas even warehouses are prospect
spaces
and so there's lots of um
[Music]
kind of environments to think of
that that like not just prospect space
there's there's like so many of these
kind of categories
and then so learning and
um making my own dictionary for what
spaces mean
and then incorporating that into the
into the game design helps strengthen my
communication
like with artifacts i wanted to talk
about
um for example in artifacts 2 when it
opens up i wanted to talk about
the time kind of as
it happens around 24 25 i think for most
people
and it's when you realize you're kind of
a little [__]
like and you start thinking about like
how did i get here and
what were the factors that happened
hopefully you do this through therapy
and so um i made it into a desert
like a place where you it's
it's wide open it's a prospect space
but it feels kind of dangerous and um
you don't know what you're looking for
yet but you know you need to find it
because it's a desert you can't hang out
in a desert you will die
like so there's this feeling of you need
to move you need
you need to get through this you don't
know what you're looking for there's a
lot of open
open space
but it is very it's critical to your
growth to
find what it is so yeah that's an
example of
how how i think about spaces or how i
use environments to
communicate um more complex messaging
yeah i love that and i i know that that
pla that piece in the
beginning of artifacts where you're sort
of in that expansive landscape and these
these questions or thoughts or doubts
are kind of coming
at you in this very visceral way um i
want to ask this question from the
audience because i think you'll
appreciate it um
ryan says thank you for the talk i was
wondering if you had thoughts on how and
why level design has shifted from
creating spaces that were obviously
mazes
designed for the player to solve versus
these more fluid spaces that seem more
intuitive
but are playing on gamer psychology and
guiding player perception like you
mentioned
yeah it's the importance of narrative
player experience and designers not
being jerks anymore
um at first it was like it was
you versus the genius white male
designer
like and now it's not it's not about the
designer like trying to beat you over
the head it's about delivering a player
experience
games are expensive they're happening um
there's something you play on the
weekend
that are they're uh a likened to cinema
they're supposed to be entertainment
experiences
um and they're ex they're they're uh
they're expensive for both
sides they're expensive to create
they're
probably i mean they're in millions like
it can be 20
300 million and they're also expensive
to
buy so having these designers that
are being combative to player experience
uh something that happens one of the
things that happens is no one finishes
the game
so you just spent 300 million or
whatever
or let's just say be conservative and
say 5 million if nothing's 5 million
that's super conservative like uh
and then 90 percent of your audience
didn't finish the game
like what a waste of money so
so yeah it's about being more kind to
players and actually wanting them to
um to experience to experience the
entire
narrative and the entire story narrative
and story are different by the way
uh i'll only get into that if you want
me to um
i want to hear it yeah
and uh so there is a there are niche
areas where it's still very like the
games are still very difficult very
competitive it's not about not making
them hard it's about making them more
accessible
and um that's to widen your player base
that's to
have more people that can come to the
game um
if you look at some of the recent games
accessibility goes all the way down to
like you know like a 20 20 thing
list of making the game playable
and that's really important so if it's
important for players it's important for
um it's important for selling games and
so i think that's what you're seeing
also you're seeing a more a shift in the
triple a industry to to
really beating out cinema
cinema's on its like last leg right now
and so
saying that stories are important and
emotional experience are
important the 2016 particularly
was this really like hitting it out of
the park with story based games
and they sold super well so now you're
seeing
games take about four to five years to
make so the reason you're seeing all
these coming out now
is because of 2016. um
and yeah it's a ripple effect of like oh
people really want
emotional experience and they don't all
just want to have
like kind of a dingy like
uh hard to get through um
game that's about nothing and so
yeah that's kind of that's what's
happening this more player experience
emotion story narrative is taking a a
front seat
and cinematic experiences
that make sense i i want to shift the
conversation to talk a little bit about
the art world and the context in which
you
studied and the context in which also
you have
a studio practice right which sits uh
adjacent to your professional practice
um and we were talking about puzzle
games and you made a comment
in tour about um is art made to be
understood
and so i'm hoping you can unpack how you
come at this intersection a little bit
and then maybe we can get into a
discussion about audience also for game
design the game
as a segway after that yeah yeah how i
come
at it i'm always suspicious
i'm suspicious of uh everything i do
uh in all the like satellite things of
it
um so pretty much all of my work
and uh decisions
are kind of tongue-in-cheek they're not
it's like when you do something you're
serious about it but then
you also question it and that's going
for both art
and games and um
for example you know i say this i say
this a lot but just for people who
haven't heard
like when i'm using unreal engine this
is
americans are our america's army engine
this is
a engine created to make things to kill
people
like from the very from
every single piece of that engine is
made so that you can create
ai in a first-person perspective for
like a fetish like killing people
and so but i love it i love not
that part i love the engine and i and i
use it
um with this in in mind and
at the same time i'm suspicious of it
and i have to
do weird things to mold what i'm given
with it and um
so yeah with the uh i think i guess when
uh talking about the art i guess art
world or just kind of art itself do you
mean
yeah you're how you think about your
studio practice and how it overlaps or
is it
diverges in something oh okay yeah with
my studio practice
i think i'm using kind of the like
encyclopedia
of game design and games and um
and blending that with
with what i've learned like with a bfa
and a master's
in in fine arts and um
yeah i think that criticality and
suspicion is really
kind of what where it diverges like i'm
not gonna
unpack like that that
violence in ratchet and clank which is
what i'm working on now
like that would be weird
[Music]
so like yeah it's it's the criticality
of
where of what i'm creating
also um of it being a play
experience and what that means like if
i'm talking about
trauma for example what does it mean to
it be experiencing someone else's
trauma um so
there's always a a um
self-reflectiveness in my work
that would be different if i was say
releasing an indie game
i think if i was releasing an indie game
it still wouldn't be the same as
what my art practice is and
it's the self-reflected reflective
nature of it
and the um
the i like to show my work
like in the stuff i make like i
i won't try to create perfect
simulations or try to
fool you into believing that this wasn't
made by someone's hand
i i like kind of the rough edges um
i like showing like my favorite thing to
do
is um
like sketching uh opposed to to
finish work or when when i write i i
like actually you seeing the lines
crossed out
as i'm writing and um like writing a
poem or something
i don't like erasing and so
my work uh my
my personal work is is layered in a way
that you can see me thinking through
things
as i'm creating them in a way that
if i was making an indie game and
definitely when i'm making triple a
uh you're not going to see
um yeah yeah i love that and we've
talked so much about with game design
the game we were going to do a solo of
that
against e3 this year because it's
literally like the staples center is
a few blocks from the gallery and of
course kovid changed all of that but
like
a lot of our talk and you went through
this exercise as well when you were
presenting your thesis show right it's
like
how do you make this accessible to an
audience and what does it
mean to make a game about game design
and so much of the piece and the humor
of the piece
is also wrapped up in the the language
and the references
as well right like you were talking
about um
the sound from from serum which comes in
and out throughout the game
and like having these kinds of humorous
references throughout so
i wonder how you think about audience
when you think about presenting this
piece and if you could talk a little bit
about like the process of installing it
in like a physical gallery space too
during your year yes so
with making game design the game i i
think the
because that was my thesis piece it was
kind of a um
a like super self-referential
joke about both being a game designer
and being an
artist and uh it was like
making a game that really only you can
play
like just like when you make an art
piece that
is very self-contained and about
yourself and
it doesn't quite matter if when people
look at it they don't
understand it like like immediately
and so this is another thing of like if
i had made an indie
title or triple a title this would not
have happened
but since i'm this was specifically made
to be
a work uh an art piece i made it where
it's like it's not like it's not glitchy
it's not broken
uh i'm yeah you can move through it it
is possible everything is possible
in it and everything self-contained in
it however the
uh references and jokes and um
there's a lot of like game dev
like inside jokes in it that
uh the only other game i've seen like
this would be
uh the beginner's guide by davey redden
and so yeah that's uh
that's what i was thinking when creating
it like
the um you know needing the
the radian sheet to solve one of the
puzzles
or uh needing a wacom
um pen to unlock like a key
section of the game and all of it being
blocked out
which is something that that
felt like a good
it felt like it it it belonged in the
conversation
of the context it was in which is like a
group show
um a group art show and so
presenting it in the gallery i'm
actually
pretty careful to go pretty like
minimalist
um until i'm not so i'll explain that in
a second
for this one this was all about game
design so
i cleared everything else that could
give you the
um impression that it was about
something else
like so i presented it you know on a
table
with a chair a couple of lights and
speakers
because anything everything means
something
and um yeah this was this was really
stripped down so she would focus
uh on the topics on the screen
rather than thinking it was about
something
else that wasn't there um
now saying uh what except when i'm not
artifacts was presented as a giant
birthday party
like artifacts is about
childhood so and about um
releasing pain and about talking about
it
and being playful
and sharing so it's a social it was a
social gathering that
was a um a child's
birthday party like parody
of like for example there were tables
where
you could um like talk about your
deepest fears or traumas
but it was those those scratch um pads
like the
they're all black and when you write on
them there's rainbows
and that's the only way you could you
could draw a picture of it and then tape
it on the wall
and um i had this
like nine foot by eight foot um
the this heart uh and it was
construction paper on everything it was
a crayon drawing of like a
memory i had that's always like memories
that
are like stuck in my head like the
things that kind of
flash when you least want them to um and
so yeah i did like
100 of those and put them on the wall
and so yeah the the
context of how it's presented really
depends on the
um on the what the game is about and how
do i
how do i want to get you into the space
to
to play the game it's always about the
game
but the space complements it right and
we talked
a little bit about like trying to maybe
have a exhibition mode where it like
plays itself in some way
or again that thing i mentioned in
lawrence session also where
a gallery visitor might have no gaming
acuity or no knowledge and so they're
even
a few steps removed from what you're
trying to do conceptually so thinking
about how people approach it
i do want to ask a question that we got
in the audience and it was about advice
for students wanting to pursue this kind
of work
specifically the question is about the
behavior of facilitators who guide
gaming for students
what advice do you have for people
pursuing game design
the behavior facilitators could can i
get clarification on that behavior
of facilitators
so so if i'm understanding correctly is
it
i i think what it's saying is
the behavior of people that usually
teach
teach games yeah facilitators who guide
gaming for students yeah
okay um so i think it
it really depends on the age of the
students what they want to accomplish
and um what the
understanding of the class or
session is and some of the differences
in that would be
so if you're running a game um
kind of a workshop for let's say 10 year
olds
i would and something like that i would
teach
i would give them something that's that
a toy box
like um if i was using a game engine i
would give them
assets they can use and push
you